##Data Biography: Sanborn Insurance Map of Boston (1873) ##

#Data Source# 

The data was collected by the Sanborn Map Company—though Sanborn map makers worked anonymously, and no name appears on the map. The data was collected by an individual, who surveyed the community on foot and examined the physical attributes of buildings, as well as collected information relevant to fire risk. The annotation from Plate 20, Volume 1 below notes that the boiler is located underground, as well as the type of pumps available for each building, as well as the quantity and location of the firehose. 

The complete dataset was owned by the Sanborn National Insurance Diagram Bureau, later renamed the Sanborn Map and Publishing Company. Now, some data is in the public domain, such as in the Boston Public Library, but much of the data from Sanborn maps are owned by EDR, a real estate consultancy.

The cadastral data used to create the map was originally owned by the County courthouse — though if the information wasn’t readily available, the map makers would just write the real estate information that was visible from the outside. The section of Plate 23 below shows the numbers inscribed on the outside of the Building, as well as a description of the kind of business on each parcel. See “Tobe Bakery” and “Undertaker”.

#Methods behind the data collection design and process#

The map includes building footprints, underground water infrastructure, overhead power cables, owner of lots. The colors encode building materials. Hand-written notes also reflect 3-dimensional building details: for example, Volume 1 plate 17 has “iron shutters’, as well as an annotation for how the boiler functions with respect to buildings.  

The main tools used for mapping in this era were the transit and the surveyor’s chains. The transit, a development of an earlier version called a theodolite is an instrument with a telescope mounted on a swivel, which allows the surveyor to measure the angle and distance between two points, using a compass of 360 degrees subdivided into 10 notches, so 360 degree variations were used. Ground distances were measured with the assistance of a “Gunter’ Chain”, which was 66 feet long and divided into 100 links. Ten square chains constituted one acre. 

The maps were colored by hand, as most cities had fewer than 20 plates. Special attention seems to have been paid to information that is relevant to assessment of fire risk, such as which walls are iron clad, how thick they are, and where water pipes are located.Sanborn maps were originally printed on 21x25” linen sheets. During the 1930s, however, the company sought to economize on production costs by using the “paste-on” method to update maps instead of re-producing the entire thing. The result was that individual blocks or areas of cities would have conflicting information, and because these “paste-ons” did not have as detailed documentation as the original maps, the historical record was blurred. 

The data for Volume 3 was collected in South Boston and East Boston. Volume 1 contained Boston proper, Volume 2 was parts of Back Bay and Roxbury, and Volume 4 comprised of portions of Charlestown, East Cambridge, Cambridge Port, Old Cambridge & Somerville. From the greater perspective, Sanborn has archived over one million maps containing the history of over 12,000 American cities and towns. The Sanborn office was headquartered in New York, so it is not clear where the physical map was stored — or to what extent there was tabular recording of the data shown on these maps.

Records for the maps are archived at the Leventhal Map and Education Center at the Boston Public Library and in the Library of Congress’ collections. These maps can also be found in city government offices such as planning, zoning, engineering, redevelopment, or public works. For most maps, they’ve been cataloged online and available for download, sometimes with georeference, or viewing in person in print.

The original purpose for this data was intended for insurance underwriters, supporting the fire insurance industry. The underwriters used the data to determine any risks and premiums based on geography. The maps show buildings, streets, and can be helpful in understanding geographical context, such as existing development, construction materials and areas for redevelopment. Today, the maps are used for understanding historical urban growth and available for academic purposes. 

Volumes 2, 3, and 4 were published in 1874, 1875, and 1876, respectively, with paste-on corrections to 1885. Volume 1 was “corrected” in 1875, 1876, 1878, 1879, and 1880. Thus the history that Volume 1 shows evolved—though it is not clear which changes correspond to which years on which page. 

This data biography affirms not objective, or universal, but rather the product of individuals making judgments what to include or not. For example, the decisions to emphasize building materials and include industrial details support a more political idea, that the primary function of a city is to support industry. Granted, these maps were developed specifically for fire purposes, but the data was only accessible to map makers and their patrons. However, these maps have become one of the most robust historical records. Therefore, the companies that were patrons of the data had a strong influence over how the city is remembered, even today. 

The practice of red-lining reflects how the spatial designation of “risk” has enormous socio-economic implications, that can persist for generations. The Federal Homeowners Insurance Corporation used red ink to designate neighborhoods with high concentrations of black residents as “too risky” for banks to provide mortgages with fair terms—thus depleting resale value of the homes in these areas, and making it more difficult for residents to buy elsewhere. Historically red-lined neighborhoods in Boston, such as Roxbury and Mattapan, continue to struggle economically. The Sanborn Fire Risk maps may have been judged more objectively, but a robust data biography is important to contextualize data representation, and provide the reader with information about how and where to use the map.
